---
layout: post
title: AWS EC2 setup with node.js Part 1
description: "Create EC2 instance and install node.js."
tags: [ec2, ec2 instance, setup, node.js, npm, AWS, EBS]
image:
  background: witewall_3.png
---

###General Outline
Please follow through the first 3 steps outlined here first.

1. Sign-up for free AWS account
2. Follow guidelines (Steps 1 to 5) [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/get-set-up-for-amazon-ec2.html){:target="_blank"}
3. Follow steps(1-3) [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/EC2_GetStarted.html){:target="_blank"}
4. Open command line tool and connect to your instance
5. Create filesystems on new device and mount it
6. Install node.js and mongodb
7. Configure system to save data to new EBS

<!--more-->

####Step 4: Setting up instance for node.js install

Before we begin, make sure you have device mounted from step 2 above.
We are going to have this device mounted at every start/restart of instance by editing fstab file.

Open terminal and type this:

{% highlight bash %}
#make copy just in case
sudo cp /etc/fstab /etc/fstab.orig
sudo nano /etc/fstab
#This will open nano, text editor.  At end of file add this line:
/dev/xvdf       /mnt/my-data   ext4    defaults,nofail        0       2
#make sure your /mnt/my-data is correct. If you have followed AWS setup guide this shoulb be correct
sudo mount -a
#if you get no errors you are set.  If you do make sure your mount point is correct.
#If for some reason you have messed up fstab file type this to bring back original fstab
sudo mv /etc/fstab.orig /etc/fstab
{% endhighlight %}

Now we have factory image of EC2 instance with elastic IP and EBS volume attached and mounted.

We are going to save our important data to EBS so it is persistant even through instance failure.

Following steps are from Kostas MAVROPALIAS [blog](http://iconof.com/blog/how-to-install-setup-node-js-on-amazon-aws-ec2-complete-guide){:target="_blank"}  

>Before we begin, there are couple of linux commands you should familiarize.
>I am a noobie, so knowing these helped.
>
>`ls` lists files in the directory
>
>`cd` change directory example `cd mydirectory`
>
>`cd ..` move up one directory
>
>`cd \` move to root directory
>
>`lsblk` list block drives
>
>`sudo su` change to superuser so you won't have to type 'sudo' in front everytime
>
>`rm` to remove file or directory, ex: `rm -rf mydirectory`
>
>`cp` to copy files ex: `cp file_name_original file_name_duplicate
>
>'ntsysv' will show all services that will run at boot.  Use 'space' to toggle on and off `tab` to highlight options.

Getting packages necessary for compiling node.js and clone from git.  
In terminal:

{% highlight bash %}
sudo yum install gcc-c++ make
sudo yum install openssl-devel
sudo yum install git
git clone git://github.com/joyent/node.git
{% endhighlight %}

After installing node.js we are installing [Express](http://expressjs.com/) for web framework.  As of today, Jan 17, 2015, most **current and stable** version of node.js was v0.10.9.  Type `git tag -l` from terminal to see list of all versions. If there are later versions just replace the version number following 'checkout' command on the bottom.  Node.js follows versioning schema of "even numbers = stable". So, v0.10.x are stable and v0.11.x are not.
Back in terminal:

{% highlight bash %}
git checkout v0.10.9
./configure
make
sudo make install
{% endhighlight %}

If your are familiar with Vi text editor:
>in vi, use
>
>`i` for input
>
>esc key to exit out of input mode
>
>`:wq!` to write, save, and quit


{% highlight bash %}
sudo vi /etc/sudoers
    #find the line that has:
    #Defaults    secure_path = /sbin:/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin
    #and add at the end. After '/urs/bin'
:/usr/local/bin
{% endhighlight %}

If you are not familiar with vi use nano text editor.
{% highlight bash %}
sudo nano /etc/sudoers
    #it should open up text editor within terminal
    #use arrow keys to navigate to line that has:
Defaults    secure_path = /sbin:/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin
    #and add the follwoing at the end of the line after "/usr/bin"
:/usr/local/bin
    #hit control x (to save and exit)
    #overwrite? yes
    #file name sudoers? enter
{% endhighlight %}

Next we need to install node package manager NPM.
{% highlight bash %}
git clone https://github.com/isaacs/npm.git
cd npm
sudo make install
{% endhighlight %}

If it gives you an error at "sudo make install" try again to force install.  Or try using `sudo make install -g`

Next we are going to install Express (web framework) and Forever (so, node server is running all the time) via npm using global flag.

{% highlight bash %}
sudo npm install express -g
sudo npm install forever -g
{% endhighlight %}

And this creates Express application skeleton.

{% highlight bash %}
sudo npm install express-generator -g
{% endhighlight %}

This lists command options.

{% highlight bash %}
express -h
{% endhighlight %}

And that's it for installing node.js and npm.  However, you still need to install Express and mongoDB on EBS volume.


